[Silence.]
[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
If you read Harold Moore's book, We Were Soldiers Once and Young, or even if you just saw the magnificent Mel Gibson motion picture, We Were Soldiers, then you already have a glimpse of the real-life story you are about to hear.
Captain Ron Lewis served his country as a helicopter pilot, assigned to lift duty for Cav 1 in Vietnam.
His ship flew low and fast over the jungles, settling down in landing zones that barely existed, dropping off soldiers and picking up soldiers, hopefully alive, but too many times not.
Today, Captain Ron Lewis is the director for the Center of Student Development at Blinn College, A&M grad class of 1964.
He's quick to tell you that his service was no more gallant than any other soldier of that war.
It is nonetheless a remarkable story.
Captain Lewis, welcome.
Well, thank you.
There is so much to tell about your story as a helicopter pilot in Vietnam.
We're going to go ahead and fast forward to your first day.
Pleiku, Vietnam, that's where you were stationed.
But your very first night there, you were
You got the experience of Vietnam very quickly, actually in your first three nights.
Take us right to your first day at Vietnam.
Well, Tom, I arrived at Pleiku.
I was assigned to the 1st Cav Division, B Troop, 1st Cavalry, 9th Squadron.
We were actually stationed at An K, and Pleiku was the pickup point.
So when I got to Pleiku, I was one of the first replacements for the 1st Cav.
It had arrived there about a year before I did.
And the guys were ready to come home.
They had served out their time.
They'd been through the battle that you mentioned that was chronicled in Colonel Moore's book.
All of the replacements that we replaced talked about that battle often.
And when we would fly over areas where it took place, for example, LZ X-ray, which you were familiar with from the movie, they would look down and say, that's LZ X-ray.
And usually with a great deal of emotion about it.
When I got there, the cab actually was out in the field.
It was not in its base camp at Anke, so a young warrant officer carried me over, and I recall that we went over to the major base at Anke where the division was stationed, and he took me up to the top of the little hill.
Now, when the cab got there, it was nothing more than jungle, and they had to fight their way and carve their way out of the jungle, and many of them had gone down into the town and had bought with their own money
materials to buy what they called hooches, which was little more than just a little square shack.
Looked like a chicken coop, basically, that they lived in.
So he carried me up to one of the guy's hooches.
and there was a cot in there and I recall it was getting late in the day and we stood on a mountain top or a long hill close to the division and we looked down this long grade and down the grade you could see that it had been cleared and there was the perimeter which had telephone poles and barbed wire and concertina and guard towers around it with machine gun emplacements and he had been there a good while and one of the things that veterans do
is they try to scare you when you can't come in.
And he was he was accomplished at doing that because he looked down the hill and we looked out into the jungle, which I couldn't see.
And of course, I was green as a gourd.
And he said, yep.
And he shook his head and he said, Charlie's out there.
Well,
you know my blood just kind of ran. I looked for Charlie. I couldn't see him in the jungle and then he took me up to the hooch and he said, well we'll have breakfast in the morning and then we'll go out to the camp. So I spent the night by myself in the hooch, and I had a 38 caliber revolver which they issued to all of the pilots. It was a little six shot four inch barrel job that was my arm at the time.
And I remember all night long the artillery going off.
And of course, when you're green, you can't really tell the difference between outgoing and incoming.
So every time one of the big guns would go boom, I would jump.
They fired flares on the perimeter all night long, so I got very little sleep that night.
I was very glad when morning came the next morning, and we were able to go down and have breakfast, and at least I had somebody around then that could kind of tell me what was going on.
Because you see, you can't tell whether to be afraid or not when you're in a situation like that.
You don't want to act like a coward, but neither do you want to let a serious situation escape.
What I found out was I was very, very safe that night, but I didn't know it at the time.
Your second night.
Well, the next day.
You had an orientation flight, I believe, the next day, right?
Yes, the next day we flew out to Contum, which is where the squadron that I was attached to was operating out of.
And we were a recon squadron, so we had scouts and we had gunships and we had a lift section.
We had a platoon that stayed with us all the time, a platoon of infantry that did scouting activities for us.
The activities that we did is we would carry the platoon in and put them down, and then if we suspected any enemy involvement somewhere, they would go check it out.
And if they ran into the enemy, then we would fly in reinforcements.
If not, then we would go pick them up at the end of the time.
So they were in contum doing some of that.
And the section leader, I was assigned to the lift section, and the section leader came in and told me that he wanted to take me on an orientation flight.
Now, understand, too, that I just graduated from flight school.
So, again, being green really does not describe a recent graduate of flight school.
The school is magnificent, but you're ill-prepared for the kinds of things that you face in a situation like that.
For example, you were used to flying 25 to 30 feet above the ground.
You found out that was way too high.
Well, we did what they called nap of the earth flying, and nap of the earth meant that you were as low on the deck as you could get, and you could use trees and hills and that kind of thing to screen.
if you came under fire.
In flight school, they taught us to do that about 30 feet off the ground, and we would follow the contour of the ground.
When he took me out on that flight, we were dragging our skids through the treetops and dipping down so close to the ground, we were about six inches, the way it looked to me, and quite frankly, he scared me really bad.
We flew down to Pleiku, as I recall, and we were on our way back, and he was just kind of giving me an orientation of the area.
And on the way back, suddenly the radio traffic began to pick up.
And we found out that one of our scout ships had actually been shot down.
And so the troop commander was calling for us to get back as quickly as we could.
He wanted to insert the infantry platoon.
Now, understand that I'm flying now with the lead ship in the lift.
We flew in to Contum.
We picked up the platoon as fast as we could, which really only took us about 20 minutes.
and we went to the area where the ship had been downed.
As I recall as we approached, when you look at a battle, it has a kind of a different look to it.
airplanes going in, dropping 500-pound bombs.
Artillery was being called into the area.
Our gunships were placing rockets and machine gun fire in the area.
So it has kind of a haze to it that's caused by the smoke.
It was getting late in the day around dusk, so the sun was going down.
It probably was around 5 o'clock when we started in and with the platoon that was going to go in and try to get our guys out that had been shot down.
Infantry platoon was magnificent.
Never hesitated to go in.
A platoon has about 30 men in it.
We had a five ship formation that was going in.
So we were flying the lead.
I was on an orientation flight, so I was trying to get as much from it as I could and learn something.
As we were going in, I recall I kept asking him, where's the LZ?
LZ stands for landing zone.
That's where we were going to land.
And he kept saying, it's right there.
It's right there.
And I kept looking and I kept saying, where is it?
And he said, it's right there.
It's right there.
Then as we got on short final, he looks over at me and he says, I want you to get close to the controls.
Put your feet on the pedals.
They're called pedals in a helicopter.
The cyclic is the main stick, and the collective is what you use to control your climb and descent.
So I did, and then he said, if I get shot, you fly us out.
Right away, I knew that was serious business.
So I tensed up.
One of the guys in the rear behind us who was coming in was new like I was, and the stick, the cyclic on the...
Huey has a button that you push.
If you push it one click, you talking intercom, you go two clicks and it goes out on the radio.
It was not uncommon for pilots to get in tight situations and just grip it tightly.
And so you'd oftentimes hear things on the radio that was just meant for the inner crew.
And he looked at his pilot and he said, I don't know about you, but this scares the hell out of me.
And that pretty much summed up the way I was feeling at the time.
We were seeing these tracers go by
And of course the artillery was dropping and our gunships were putting in rocket fire close by.
We dropped in and we dropped the infantry platoon off.
And what I remember about that is I'm sitting in the right hand seat and as I look out, they just kind of disappeared.
They left the ship, they went into the jungle.
We pulled out and as we did, we circled around, we watched our other ships go in and deposit their load.
There was only enough room for one at a time in the LZ.
which, and you were absolutely correct, I never would have selected that as a place where a helicopter could land.
We was on the side of a mountain, a deep, you know, quite a slope.
But they got out and they left.
So we went and as was our, you know, normal procedure circled about waiting, you know, for them to finish their job so we could go back in and pick them up.
During that time, we understood, we realized that the pilots had been killed
So they fought their way into the downed helicopter and recovered the bodies and then brought them back to the LZ.
By the time they did that, it was getting closer to dark.
It was dusk.
And then we were given the word to go back in and pick them up.
So we went back into the same LZ.
I remember we landed.
They were not visible as we came in.
As soon as we landed, they just kind of appeared from the sides of the jungle, ran for the ship.
They brought the two bodies on board.
They had them in body bags, and so we put them on board the ship.
They put them on board the ship, and then we pulled out.
During this time period, I realized these guys were doing things with that helicopter that I was totally unequipped to do, that I knew I couldn't fly like that.
We got back, we deposited the bodies.
When we got back to the camp at Contoum, it was after dark.
Now, I had brought my gear out in a duffel bag and I'd put it down in the field as we'd landed.
My expectation was that I'd go find my duffel bag, get my sleeping bag in my little tent and set it up.
I couldn't find it.
So that night I had to spend sleeping on a helicopter.
Which they had advised you not to do.
They told me that was a no-no because if we got hit, that's the place that they would try for.
But really, there was no other place.
It rained every night, so there was a little bit of a shelter.
you know, in the helicopter.
Well, obviously I didn't sleep very well that night either.
Once again, the artillery and the flares and that sort of thing was going on.
So that was my first two days.
Yeah, that was your first two days.
Right.
And then you moved not too much farther than that.
First off, first CAV or CAV-1, that's an air mobile group.
It's an air mobile.
And the design of that is to pick up troops, pick up companies and move them out quickly from one spot to another.
Our squadron was capable
of loading within about a three-hour period, we can move the entire squadron.
All right.
So you get an order to move and you're headed to the coast and this is your next crisis.
That's right.
And it's like day three or day four.
But it's very important because I want you to talk about it because it was really your first realization of what's meant about the Fellowship of Soldiers.
That's correct.
we had gotten word that there was a big battle going on on the coast.
And so oftentimes that's the way we move.
We'd get a rumor that there was a battle and then a word would come down that we were to move.
So we had the orders to move to the coast, pulled up stakes, we pulled up our tents, we loaded our helicopters, we loaded everything in it.
We had infantry on board and all of our gear.
And I was flying with a warrant officer who had been there for a good while.
And I explained to you earlier,
that guys that had been there really did not like to fly with us, with the new guys.
They felt like we were there for one purpose, and that was to kill them before they got a chance to go home.
And in many respects, that wasn't too far from the truth.
So he was kind of grumpy.
But anyway, we were flying, going to the coast.
We were about 3,500 feet, as I recall.
when we heard a thump, which was around hitting the helicopter.
And he knew what that was.
I'd, you know, I'd never heard that before.
So I really, I just heard the thump and wondered, and I actually had the controls.
The first indication I got was when he began to tense up a little bit, I saw him, you know, tense and, and he reached for the controls and he said, I've got it.
And so being more experienced than I was, obviously he had it and I was very glad to turn it over to him.
He immediately put us into an auto rotation in a dive as much as you can get in a helicopter.
We were coming down about 95 knots in a full auto rotation, which means there's no pitch in the blade, so you have no lift.
You're basically falling out of the air.
And as I looked, I tried to figure out what was going on.
I noticed that the major caution light was on, and the Huey has a master caution that comes on, and then you have a little panel you look at
where it'll tell you what's wrong.
And your first indication is that master caution.
Master caution light was on.
I looked down and I saw it was transmission oil pressure that we were losing or had lost.
And so they taught us in flight school, you had 90 seconds from the time that you lost transmission oil pressure, then you needed to be on the ground because it was going to freeze up and quit flying.
So he was, he had already, you know, obviously been more skilled than I.
had caught it and had started down, and we were in a fast descent to the ground.
And basically what I was doing then is just monitoring the gauges and watching.
So we came out of the sky.
He made a stiff turn.
He picked a landing spot, and it happened to be on a sandbar in a river, which was fairly large.
And so we came out fast.
It came down fast.
got to the ground, he landed the ship, and we started shutdown procedures immediately.
When we got to the ground, the infantry that we had on board, who were all veterans, knew what to do.
They got off and they started setting up a perimeter immediately.
So what was left for me to do was to unstrap and get out of the helicopter.
I remember
When I opened the door and I stepped out, and again, being green, I had no idea what to expect.
I didn't know what was going on.
I didn't even know what to do.
I turned around, and as I looked to the rear, our guys were in a full combat assault landing behind us.
And you've seen that in the movies.
It's quite an experience to look back and see those helicopters coming in with those infantrymen on the skids, and they're ready to get out.
Now, we were not taking fire, but there was always that concern when you were in the jungle like that.
So they landed, they hit the ground, they set up a perimeter immediately.
And I told you that was kind of the first indication or first experience I had of feeling what I call the camaraderie of combat.
It's the idea that a person, another person is actually gonna risk their life to help you.
And it's a powerful, powerful feeling.
And we had that a lot in the company troop that I was in because we had to do that a lot.
In the book by Joe Galloway and Hal Moore, we were soldiers once and young.
Moore writes, American soldiers in battle don't fight for what some president says on TV.
They don't fight for mom, apple pie.
the American flag, they fight for one another.
He wrote that in the book.
And you could see that with that experience.
Those are very good words.
And the camaraderie that we felt, because I really think the guys that we flew around with, we carried the same people most of the time.
they knew that we'd come in and get them.
You know, and we were talking sometime later in my experience, which was about, well, I guess we back up now.
We're three days into my tour.
I've already...
seen a ship shot down or been involved in a shoot down.
I've been shot down myself.
We have medevaced dead pilots.
I've not slept for three days.
And I was thinking at the time, I was a pretty depressed young man at the time.
I was concerned about whether or not this was survival or not, survivable or not.
But at any rate, we went on and we did assimilate.
After a while, they assigned me a co-pilot.
We had a co-pilot and I was flying with another new guy.
And this really felt more comfortable than with the veterans because we were more at the same skill level.
So we helped each other.
Right.
But we moved back into the area where that battle took place.
This was at a special forces camp outside of Plamey.
The mountain was Chupong Mountain, the Idrang River Valley, which was well known in the annals of the 1st Cav Division.
And the idea was we were going to go back in.
It was close to the Cambodian border.
So they were sending supplies across, and we were trying to interdict those supplies and catch the soldiers as they came across.
And we knew that they used that as a trail often.
So we were going to set the platoon down in the Ajang Valley, and they were going to set up along a trail.
The plan was that they would set up and pull off an ambush.
So we were attempting to ambush the North Vietnamese as they came across.
We were going to set them down in the late afternoon.
If the ambush went as planned, then the platoon was going to divide into singles and double soldiers, and they were going to infiltrate back to the I Drang, and then the next morning we were going to pick them up.
We went out that night, late that afternoon, and started making false landings to try to throw the enemy off as to where they would be.
And what we'd do is we'd fly into an area, act like we were landing, and then come out, and then go someplace else.
And we did, and we dropped them into a landing zone.
Now, my mindset was when we dropped them that I was going to go back to play me, and I'd be spending the night there and sleeping a peaceful night, and the next morning we'd get up and go pick them up.
It didn't work out that way.
When we dropped them on the ground, it wasn't more than 10 minutes until they captured a North Vietnamese soldier that was coming down the trail.
They had an interpreter with them,
And the interpreter questioned the soldier and essentially he was laughed at.
He was told that they were in the midst of a battalion size unit of North Vietnamese and they were at headquarters and there were soldiers all around them.
So we knew they were in trouble.
They started taking fire almost immediately.
And our company commander knew if he left them on the ground, they weren't going to survive the night.
So we were ordered to go back in and pick them up.
It was a terrifying extraction that night for me in that we went in after dark.
We had to pick them up from a bomb crater.
The thing that they guided us in with was a flashlight.
And to fly a helicopter in the dark of night,
and find a landing zone, guiding on a flashlight is not the most gratifying experience you'd ever like to have.
So that was another issue.
But I think that our guys knew that we were gonna come after them no matter where they were or what the situation was.
And I think you described it as a matter of fact,
At night in Vietnam is like being in the inside of a bowling ball.
Yes, that's right, because there are no lights on the ground.
So you're pretty much on instruments and looking.
And I think the most dangerous thing, really, is mid-air collisions.
Right.
Because if you're in a situation where you've got other ships flying around, whether they be the Air Force craft or your gunships or other kinds of ships, then you have to be very careful about collisions in that situation.
I want to, Captain Lewis, go to some photographs that you have supplied.
These are photographs that you actually took during this time.
A lot of them are from your ship when we're ready to go.
Describe what we're looking at now.
This is your Huey Model D that you... That was my Model D. That was my list ship.
This one is identifiable by the square on the door.
All of our ships had squares on the door like that.
That was the B Troop Signif.
What am I trying to say here?
Insignia.
Right.
On this one, you see soldiers kind of lounging around.
That was our infantry platoon, and they spent a lot of time doing that when they weren't actually out on a scout mission.
But we were ready to go whenever they were called.
And continue our little makeshift slideshow here.
Okay, and that's yours truly.
We're flying.
My co-pilot took that picture and we used to swap cameras back and forth so we could take pictures of each other when not much was going on.
So we did want to have a chronicle that we were actually there flying.
Now, this is a remarkable picture to me.
This is the actual of the troops coming onto your chopper.
That's correct.
From battle, I guess.
Yes, we're in a landing zone there, and frankly, I don't remember the exact circumstances of this particular landing zone, but I shot that from the pilot's seat, and they're coming to get on to be taken out.
As you can see there in a movie.
What kind of camera were you using?
I used a little Minolta, 35 millimeter.
All of us had cameras, so this was a... And this?
I'm sorry.
Here you can see some soldiers lined up along the levee.
They're under fire and we're flying over.
And I snapped this just as we went over.
Remarkable photograph.
There you are checking out some damage on your Huey.
Yes, this looks like a shot that we took.
And so we're looking this over.
As I was telling you, the most vulnerable part of the Huey is the pilot.
And so they would try to target the pilot.
And you can see this is not too far from the pilot's compartment where we took this hit.
Talking about landing zones, I guess what we're looking at now is a pretty good landing zone compared to some of the things.
Well, there are several in here that would be fairly good, but this is kind of a typical picture of the terrain and the stream bed with the trees.
And the Vietnamese would go out and carve out rice paddies out of the trees, so you'd see them in some very unusual places.
There's a photograph with the... Okay, now this is a picture.
If you can, you're the pilot in the Huey.
You're going into a landing zone.
Your aircraft on the side, your gunships are going in, laying down a suppressing fire for you.
When the rockets and the artillery go in, they don't make this big fiery ball that you see on television.
Usually what you see is a little smoke and a little dust, and of course you can't see the shrapnel.
But that area there where you see the smoke would be a terrible area to be in because the shrapnel is tearing that place up.
We're going to move on because, believe it or not, we're almost running out of time.
This is just one of the camps, is that right?
That's a Vietnamese village.
That would be a Montagnard village in the central highlands.
And that was pretty typical of the kind of villages that you'd see.
Those houses, I don't know that you can tell here, are on stilts.
And actually, they had troubles with tigers and others sometimes coming into the village and tearing people off.
There you are on Christmas?
That's on Christmas 1966.
And what I'm doing there is I'm sitting in front of my tent.
You can see the tent in the background.
And I'm opening a present that I got from home.
Very special one, too.
And here's our final picture.
And this one is kind of dear to me.
I was telling you, when I went back through my slides, I was surprised at the numbers of pictures that I had of children.
American soldiers really opened their heart to kids.
If you hear stories about soldiers mistreating kids in foreign battlefields, that's not true.
In this particular one, one of the soldiers had written back home and had gotten a box of clothes that I think his church had collected.
And we were out in the village or at the edge of the village giving those to the children.
Indeed.
Some remarkable photographs indeed.
Stand Down Day wasn't always great for you.
Talk about, real quick, we're running out of time.
We've only got about a minute and a half left.
Talk about Stand Down Day.
Yeah, the one that I remember most, and I used to hate those days, we would have what we'd call stand downs.
Stand downs were like a holiday.
It was like a weekend or a Saturday because, actually,
Over there, I lost track of time because you didn't have the weekends to go on.
So we'd have days when we were supposed to not do anything and clean our equipment and basically not have to worry about being shot.
Almost invariably, things would happen.
On one, we were sent back to Pleiku to pick up some mail.
And Smitty and I, who's my co-pilot, were in our ship.
And we'd gone back, and we were coming back.
We had, I think, four soldiers on board.
And one of our ships was shot down.
And because we were unloaded, we had room, then we were the one that was selected to go in and pick them up.
So we had to make a very hazardous, under-fire landing to get those guys out.
But we did.
We managed to get them out, and the whole troop was involved, and it was quite an experience.
Indeed.
27 and a half minutes goes by so very, very fast.
We could talk so much more about your experience and your service, but thank you very much for your service.
Well, thank you.
I appreciate what you're doing.
Captain Ron Lewis, thank you very much.
World War II veterans are called part of the greatest generation, and maybe they are, but the bravest generation, no, that title must be equally shared by all men and women who have gone in harm's way for our freedoms.
You've had the honor of meeting one of those today.
And we salute and thank Captain Ron Lewis, Vietnam Chopper Pilot, Cav One, Aggie Class of 64.
Please thank a veteran today.
And thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]